Title: Quantitative mass spectrometric analysis to unravel glycoproteomic signature of follicular fluid in women with polycystic ovary syndrome
Description: Polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS) is a complex endocrinopathy affecting reproductive aged women, whose etiology has not been fully understood yet. The follicular growth is arrested at preantral stage leading to cyst formation, consequently resulting in anovulatory infertility in these women. As follicular fluid provides the microenvironment for the growing oocyte, molecular profiling of the fluid may provide unique information about pathophysiology associated with follicular development in PCOS. Modification with oligosaccharide chains are known to influence functions of several secreted proteins and these glycoproteins also play a role in disease pathology. The glycoproteomic profile of follicular fluid of PCOS has not been explored in PCOS yet. In the present study, we performed comparative glycoproteomic analysis by first enriching glycoproteins using three different lectins viz. concanavalin A, wheat germ agglutinin and Jacalin from follicular fluid of women with PCOS and controls undergoing in vitro fertilization. Peptides generated by trypsin digestion were labeled with isobaric tags for relative and absolute quantification reagents and analyzed by liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry.  We identified 10 differentially expressed glycoproteins, in the follicular fluid of women with PCOS compared to control. Two important differentially expressed proteins- SERPINA1 and ITIH4, were consistently upregulated and downregulated respectively, upon validation by Western blotting in follicular fluid and real-time polymerase chain reaction in granulosa cells. These proteins play a role in angiogenesis and extracellular matrix stabilization which are vital for follicle maturation. In conclusion, comparative glycoprotein profiling of follicular fluid from women with PCOS and controls revealed altered expression of proteins which may contribute to defects in follicle development in PCOS pathophysiology.
