Accession: E-TABM-879
Source list: lbd-screened
Title: Transcriptional profiling of human olfactory neurosphere-derived cell lines from healthy and idiopathic Parkinsons disease individuals.
Study type: transcription profiling by array
Description: The human olfactory epithelium represents a readily accessible source of adult neural cell types which can be propagated in vitro. We have used this feature to establish olfactory neurosphere-derived (hONS) cells lines from patients with idiopathic Parkinson's disease (PD) and healthy controls. We interrogated several metabolic activities of hONS cells from PD patients and detected significantly decreased levels of reduced glutathione and MTS [3- (4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-5-(3-carboxymethoxyphenyl)-2-(4-sulfophenyl)-2H-tetrazolium, inner salt] metabolism. Both were decreased to approximately 80% of control donor hONS cell levels. These decreases did not correlate with any other known parameter, such as donor age or gender nor with the number of passages in vitro. Therefore we conclude that the differences are either symptomatic of PD or reflect an underlying predisposition for PD. Transcriptomic analysis identified the xenobiotic and anti-oxidant pathways, mediated by the aryl hydrocarbon receptor and NRF2, respectively, as significantly dysregulated in PD hONS cells. We show here that activation of the NRF2 pathway, by ectopic L-sulforaphane treatment, increased total glutathione and MTS metabolism levels to control-donor hONS cell levels in 12 of 14 hONS cell lines established from 14 individual donors with idiopathic PD. The importance of our results is three-fold. Firstly, they corroborated data obtained from in vivo and other in vitro cell models but uniquely on varied human genetic backgrounds. Secondly, they demonstrate that cells from PD patients are responsive to NRF2 pathway activation. Finally, they suggest that the dysregulation of the NRF2 pathway is not merely symptomatic of PD but may be a contributing factor.
Sample count: 33
Assay count: Not found

Samples:
  Experimental Designs:
    Experimental Designs: co-expression_design, transcription profiling by array
  Experimental Factors:
    Experimental Factors: DiseaseStage, Compound, Sex, Age
  Experimental Factors > Source Characteristics:
    Organism: Homo sapiens
    Developmental stage: Not found
    Organism part: Not found
    Disease: normal, idiopathic Parkinsons disease
  Additional screening-relevant attributes:
    Disease state/staging:
      DiseaseStage: normal
      Diseasestaging: idiopathic Parkinsons disease, normal
      DiseaseStaging: idiopathic Parkinsons disease, normal
    Cell type/line:
      CellLine: olfactory neurosphere-derived cells (hONS)
    Clinical/familial:
      Not found
    Treatment/compound:
      Compound: Lsulforaphane
    Quality controls:
      Not found

Assays and Data:
  Technology: Array assay
  Assay by Molecule: RNA assay
